<h1>Donating To Mongrel2</h1>

<p>The Mongrel2 Project is volunteer run and mostly written by me, <a
href="http://zedshaw.com">Zed A. Shaw</a>.  If you believe in the project's
goal of a truly programming language agnostic practical bad ass web server,
then please donate.  You can also see a list of <a
href="/wiki?name=Donors">Donors</a> so far.  Donations
go to me as a way to fund my work on Mongrel2.</p>

<h2>Donate With Paypal</h2>

<p><a href="http://paypal.com">Paypal</a> is the preferred way to donate and works for anyone no matter where they are from.</p>

<h2>Advertising Sponsor</h2>

<p>If you want a more prominent display then I'll be putting a small number of
small logos representing companies who agree to sponsor Mongrel2.  If you're
interested in sponsoring Mongrel2 then contact <a href="mailto:zedshaw@zedshaw.com">zedshaw@zedshaw.com</a> and let me know what
you'd like to give and who you are.</p>

<p>Keep in mind though that I don't do backroom deals, so even if you donate I will still try to keep the project focused on what
people are doing with it and what fits my vision for the project.  Donating money gets you focus on your company, not say in my project.
</p>

<h2>Other Ways To Help</h2>

<p>If you can't donate money but still want to help then there's plenty of things you can do to help the project:</p>

<ul>
<li>Try running actual projects on Mongrel2 and report bugs in the <a href="/tktnew">Tickets</a> section so we can fix them.</li>
<li>Writing a blog post about Mongrel2, good or bad, helps, but make sure we know about it so we can read it.</li>
<li>Offering to write documentation for your particular operating system flavor.</li>
<li>Fixing things and sending in patches.</li>
<li>Creating handler implementations in other languages, the more the better.</li>
<li>Writing new configuration interfaces to compliment the existing Python based m2sh.</li>
<li>Thinking up crazy features so we can maybe implement them, and probably tell you to do it as a handler.</li>
<li>If you're in SF and are using Mongrel2 then I (Zed) will gladly come check out what you are doing.  It's like free consulting!</li>
</ul>

